Kafka upgrade docs (#1126)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/book/proc-upgrading-brokers-newer-kafka.adoc

// This module is included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-upgrading-kafka-versions.adoc

[id='proc-upgrading-brokers-newer-kafka-{context}']

= Upgrading brokers to a newer Kafka version

> This procedure describes how to upgrade a {ProductName} Kafka cluster from one version to a higher version; for example 2.0.0 to 2.1.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This procedure describes how to upgrade a {ProductName} Kafka cluster from one version to a later version; for example, 2.0.0 to 2.1.0.
```

+
For example, if upgrading from Kafka 2.0.0 to 2.1.0:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Kafka
spec:
  # ...
  kafka:
    version: 2.1.0 <1>
    config:
      log.message.format.version: "2.0" <2>
      # ...
----
<1> This is changed to the new version
<2> This remains at the previous version

. Wait for the Cluster Operator to upgrade the cluster.
If the old and new versions of Kafka have different interbroker protocol versions, look in the Cluster Operator logs for an `INFO` level message like:
+
[source]
----
Reconciliation #_<num>_(watch) Kafka(_<namespace>_/_<name>_): Kafka version upgrade from _<from-version>_ to _<to-version>_, phase 2 of 2 completed
----
Alternatively, if the old and new versions of Kafka have the same interbroker protocol version, look in the Cluster Operator logs for an `INFO` level message like:
+
[source]
----
Reconciliation #_<num>_(watch) Kafka(_<namespace>_/_<name>_): Kafka version upgrade from _<from-version>_ to _<to-version>_, phase 1 of 1 completed
----
+
For example, using `grep`:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes"]
----

> oc logs -f _<cluster-operator-pod-name>_ | grep -E "Kafka version upgrade from [0-9.]+ to [0-9.]+, phase ([0-9]+) of \1 completed"

Author: kubectl example

// This module is included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-upgrading-kafka-versions.adoc

[id='proc-upgrading-brokers-newer-kafka-{context}']

= Upgrading brokers to a newer Kafka version

This procedure describes how to upgrade a {ProductName} Kafka cluster from one version to a higher version; for example 2.0.0 to 2.1.0.

.Prerequisites

* The Cluster Operator, which supports both versions of Kafka, is up and running.
* A `Kafka` resource to be upgraded.
* You have checked that your `Kafka.spec.kafka.config` contains no options that are not supported in the version of Kafka that you are upgrading to.

.Procedure

> . Consult the table below and determine whether the new Kafka version has a different log message format version than the old version. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Consult the table below and determine whether the new Kafka version has a different log message format version than the previous version. 
```

+
include::snip-kafka-versions.adoc[leveloffset=+1]
+
If the log message format versions are the same proceed to the next step. 

> Otherwise ensure the `Kafka.spec.kafka.config` has the `log.message.format.version` configured to the default for the old version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, ensure the `Kafka.spec.kafka.config` has the `log.message.format.version` configured to the default for the previous version.
```

+
For example, if upgrading from 2.0.0:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Kafka
spec:
  # ...
  kafka:
    version: 2.0.0
    config:
      log.message.format.version: "2.0"
      # ...
----
+
NOTE: You must format the value of `log.message.format.version` as a string to prevent it from being interpreted as a number.
+
If `log.message.format.version` is unset then set it and wait for the resulting rolling restart of the Kafka cluster to complete.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

Reviewer 2: Adding a plus will make the next step numbered 2

> . Change the `Kafka.spec.kafka.version` to specify the new version, but leave the `log.message.format.version` as the old version.

Reviewer: In my build, this is rendering as step 1 rather than step 2.

> . Change the `Kafka.spec.kafka.version` to specify the new version, but leave the `log.message.format.version` as the old version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Change the `Kafka.spec.kafka.version` to specify the new version, but leave the `log.message.format.version` as the previous version.
```

If the image to be used is different from the image for the given version of Kafka configured in the Cluster Operator's `STRIMZI_KAFKA_IMAGES` then configure the `Kafka.spec.kafka.image` as well.
+
For example, if upgrading from Kafka 2.0.0 to 2.1.0:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Kafka
spec:
  # ...
  kafka:
    version: 2.1.0 <1>
    config:
      log.message.format.version: "2.0" <2>
      # ...
----
<1> This is changed to the new version

> <2> This remains at the old version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> This remains at the previous version
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

. Wait for the Cluster Operator to upgrade the cluster.

> If the old and new versions of Kafka have different interbroker protocol versions, look in the Cluster Operator logs for an `INFO` level message like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If both the previous and new versions of Kafka have different interbroker protocol versions, look in the Cluster Operator logs for an `INFO` level message such as:
```

Author: It's not an example, it's a pattern! To me, "such as" is quite strongly suggestive of being a literal example. I wonder if "...`INFO` level message matching the following pattern:" (or with the following form) would be clearer, wdyt?

Reviewer 2: The IBM style guide says to not use 'like' to mean 'such as'. 'matching the following pattern' is just more words to say 'such as' :) hehe  I'm not against your wording if you feel strongly about it.

+
[source]
----
Reconciliation #_<num>_(watch) Kafka(_<namespace>_/_<name>_): Kafka version upgrade from _<from-version>_ to _<to-version>_, phase 2 of 2 completed
----

> Alternatively, if the old and new versions of Kafka have the same interbroker protocol version, look in the Cluster Operator logs for an `INFO` level message like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if both the previous and new versions of Kafka have the same interbroker protocol version, look in the Cluster Operator logs for an `INFO` level message such as:
```

+
[source]
----
Reconciliation #_<num>_(watch) Kafka(_<namespace>_/_<name>_): Kafka version upgrade from _<from-version>_ to _<to-version>_, phase 1 of 1 completed
----
+
For example, using `grep`:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes"]
----
oc logs -f _<cluster-operator-pod-name>_ | grep -E "Kafka version upgrade from [0-9.]+ to [0-9.]+, phase ([0-9]+) of \1 completed"
----

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

. Upgrade all your client applications to use the new version of the client libraries.
+

> WARNING: You cannot downgrade after completing this step. If, for whatever reason, you need to revert the update at this point, follow the procedure xref:proc-downgrading-brokers-older-kafka-{context}[]. 

Reviewer 2: Should this {context} actually be the text of context on the page in question?

Author: I don't know. I long ago gave up trying to understand the crazy rules about linking in modular docs. If I replace `{context}` then I'm assuming that the other module has been included in the doc with that context. If I don't replace `{context}` then I'm assuming it will be included with whatever my context is. It seems to me that neither assumption is necessarily justified if we're assuming that modules can be reused arbitrarily (in fact, in that case we cannot even assume that the place we're linking to even exists). On the other hand either would work in in the current context where we're trying to write a single book. So just tell me what you want.

Reviewer 2: Whenever it's an xref the context should be spelled out - you're linking to another section in the guide and the context may not be the same as the module you're putting the xref in.

> 

Reviewer 2: Delete line

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

. If the log message format versions, as identified in step 1, are the same proceed to the next step. 
Otherwise change the `log.message.format.version` in `Kafka.spec.kafka.config` to the default version for the new version of Kafka now being used.
For example, if upgrading to 2.1.0:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Kafka
spec:
  # ...
  kafka:
    version: 2.1.0
    config:
      log.message.format.version: "2.1"
      # ...
----
+
Wait for the Cluster Operator to update the cluster.

.Additional resources

> * See xref:proc-downgrading-brokers-older-kafka-{context}[] for the procedure to downgrade a {ProductName} Kafka cluster from one version to a lower version, for example 2.0.1 to 2.0.0.

Reviewer 2: Should this {context} actually be the text of context on the page in question?

`Reconciliation #_<num>_(watch) Kafka(_<namespace>_/_<name>_): Kafka version upgrade from _<from-version>_ to _<to-version>_, phase 2 of 2 completed` (if two rolling updates were required), or
`Reconciliation #_<num>_(watch) Kafka(_<namespace>_/_<name>_): Kafka version upgrade from _<from-version>_ to _<to-version>_, phase 1 of 1 completed` (if a single rolling update was required).
For example, using `grep`:
+
[shell,subs="+quotes"]
----
oc logs -f _<co-pod-name>_ | grep -E "Kafka version upgrade from [0-9.]+ to [0-9.]+, phase ([0-9]+) of \1 completed"
----

. Upgrade each client application to use the new version of the client libraries.
+
NOTE: If, for whatever reason, you need to revert the update at this point, follow the procedure xref:proc-downgradings-brokers-older-kafka-{context}[]. 
You will not be able to downgrade after this step.

. Change the `log.message.format.version` in `Kafka.spec.kafka.config` to the default version for the new version of Kafka now being used.
For example, if upgrading to 2.1.0:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Kafka
spec:
  # ...
  kafka:
    version: 2.1.0
    config:

>       log.message.format.version=2.1

Author: Yes, you could let it default at this point, but then next upgrade you've have to add it back in (so it was specified explicitly) before you could do the update. So it seems easier to me to just leave it in there all the time, thus avoiding a rolling update.
